The Nightingale "Debug" Command, Especially for Finding Accidental Problems
Nightingale Technical Note #8
Don Byrd, October 1999

For related information, see Nightingale Technical Note #2: Nightingale Files, and
Troubleshooting Files Nightingale CanÕt Open.

NB: Nightingale's "Debug" command appears in the Test menu: that entire menu exists
only in beta copies of Nightingale! If you don't have a Test menu, you don't have a
beta copy.

Here's some example output (with line numbers added) from Test>Debug option "Check
Standard Things"

1. DEBUG 'M'-Std: CHK MAIN:
2. *DCheckNode: MEASURE AT 26 HAS ILLEGAL spacePercent 601.
3. DCheckNode: NOTE IN SYNC AT 231 STAFF 1 noteNum 72 AND NOTATION DISAGREE: ACCIDENTAL?
4. DCheckNode: NOTE IN SYNC AT 727 STAFF 7 noteNum 88 AND NOTATION DISAGREE.
5. Strict contin. sel, 1 objs in range, 1 sel, 13 total.  1 voices.
6.    CHK MASTER:  Done.    CHK CLIP:  Done. 2 ERRORS.

1. Viewing and saving debug output. Debug output is displayed in the "Consolation"
window; to show it, choose the Test>Show Debug Window command. You can save
everything that appears in the window to a file by clicking the the little document
icon at the bottom of the Consolation window (the third icon from the right), and
giving it a filename to save it on.

2. Debug output in general. The Debug "Check" options check the Master Page and
Clipboard data structures as well as the score proper. In line 1, "CHK MAIN" means
following messages are for the score; in this case, there are no messages about the
Master Page ("CHK MASTER") or Clipboard ("CHK CLIP"). There are three levels of
errors:
	Most important: messages about problems are prefixed with '¥'
	More important: messages about problems are prefixed with '*'
	Less important: messages about problems have no prefix
In general, if you see any messages with '¥' in front of them, you probably have a
serious problem, for example, corrupt data structure: the file may be unusable or may
become unusable at any time. Messages with no prefix are almost never serious in the
sense of causing Nightingale to behave badly.

Finding items referred to by Debug messages is not simple. Staff numbers are simply
counted from the top of the score in the obvious way. The phrase "AT 26" means the
item has link number 26. It's possible to find that item with the Test>Browser
command. Be sure nothing is selected. Then type 26 into the numeric field, then
click Go, then Select, then dismiss the Browser: at this point item 26 will be the
only selected item in the score, and you use the normal Go To Selection command to
find it. Debug "Display index" can also help find items, since it give a summary of
link numbers for the entire score: before using it, note that editing the score can
re-arrange link numbers, so it's much more helpful with a just-opened score.

3. Debug messages about disagreement between MIDI note number ("noteNum") and
notation. In the example output, both such messages say a note's MIDI note number
disagrees with the notation. Nightingale suggests the problem is an accidental, as
in the line 3, when the discrepancy is only a semitone; it does not suggest that if
the discrepancy is larger than that. In practice, the "ACCIDENTAL?" form is far, far
more common, and is usually due to a bug or bugs in Nightingale.

